[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WILLIAM HENRY:
What happens when
a visionary president
and a cult-minded vice
president and a Russian
mystic get together to search
for one of the most powerful
relics known to humankind?
>>CLARE HENRY: Today on
Arcanum, Nicholas Roerich
and the Chintamani Stone.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WILLIAM: Imagine a stone
sent from another world that
could magically fulfill
all your wishes.
>>CLARE: And we're not talking
about a diamond ring here.
>>WILLIAM: We're talking
about the Chintamani
stone, the stone of Shambhala.
In Buddhism, the
Chintamani is said
to be one of four
relics that came
in the chest that
fell from the sky.
>>CLARE: Though the
king who discovered them
didn't not understand the
purpose of the objects,
he kept them and revered them.
>>WILLIAM: A prominent
element a Buddhist
lore, this magical
object was typically
conceived as a fiery
or luminous pearl,
and traditions concerning it
spread from India to Tibet
to Central Asia, China, Japan,
Korea, and even to America.
>>CLARE: As the name indicates,
the defining characteristic
of this legendary
talismatic wishing stone
is its alleged
ability to fill all
it's owners desires, no
matter how fantastic.
And be they spiritual
or material in nature.
>>WILLIAM: It can create wealth,
drive away evil, cure illness,
purify water, and
perform other marvels.
>>CLARE: Where is
it now, we may ask?
In William's feature
investigation,
he will show you how the
modern trail and search
for the Chintamani leads
to President Franklin D.
Roosevelt, his Vice President
Henry A. Wallace, and painter
Nicholas Roerich.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>WILLIAM: It was March, 1933.
The Great Depression
was suffocating
the American spirit.
The Dust Bowl had transformed
America's breadbasket
into an absolute
desolate wasteland.
And America was looking
for a new beginning,
looking for answers.
Enter Franklin D.
Roosevelt, a wounded king
who, like King Arthur,
rose from his throne
and promised a New Deal to
transform this wasteland
into a flourishing
garden once more.
Meet Henry A. Wallace,
corn geneticist, genius,
FDR's Secretary of Agriculture
and hand-picked successor.
Library of Congress
historian Paul Sifton
said "Henry A. Wallace is among
the most genuinely learned men
in American public life since
Benjamin Franklin and Thomas
Jefferson."
That's really saying something.
What most don't realize
is that he was also
a disciple of a Russian
master and artist named
Nicholas Roerich.
Wallace sent Roerich
on an expedition
to Mongolia that lasted six
years, ostensibly to collect
seeds of plants that
could resist drought.
But behind the scenes, most
knew there was another agenda.
In fact, what insiders
knew is that Roerich
was sent to Mongolia to
search for signs of the Second
Coming of Jesus and also the
secrets of the Holy Grail.
But beyond that, an
even greater secret.
Born in Saint
Petersburg, Russia,
Roerich lived around the
world until his death
in Naggar, India in 1947.
An extraordinary genius who came
from a royal family in Russia,
he was trained as an
artist and a lawyer.
And his interests included
literature, geography,
philosophy, archaeology,
but especially
art, a true modern
Renaissance man.
It was in his later
years that his abundance
of creative genius as a great
artist, scholar, and writer
and explorer came to the
attention of the world.
But then after this
significant episode
in his life with
FDR and Wallace,
his reputation was severely,
severely tarnished.
The reason why, we will
reveal momentarily.
Wallace had been a disciple
of Roerich since the 1920s,
and both men were deeply
steeped in ancient occult lore
and also deeply inspired by
the promise of a new world
order, a New Deal, a new order
of the ages, if you will.
A return, even,
to the golden age.
As a painter, Roerich was
influenced by Victor Vasnetsov,
a fellow friend and
well known artist.
Roerich, however, was
one who was destined
to incorporate
his spiritual work
with his artistic endeavors.
Roerich claimed to possess
the Chintamani Stone,
one of four relics that came
to Earth in a chest from heaven
and is held by bodhisattvas,
or enlightened being.
Between 1923 and 1928, Roerich
followed the path, the alleged
path of the so-called
lost years of Jesus
and took the Chintamani stone
into the heartland of the Far
East in order to reunite
it with the mother
stone it had originally
been separated from,
a massive jewel that
resided in Shambhala,
the Land of the Immortals.
We have representations
here of Roerich's path
as he traveled through
India on into Mongolia,
through Tibet to the Land of the
Immortals in search Shambhala.
Ultimately, though, it was these
three men, FDR Nicholas Roerich
and Henry A. Wallace, who were
to reenact the archetypal drama
of the three wise men seeking
the secrets of the Holy
Grail, the Chintamani and
this Land of the Immortals.
What did they discover?
Ah, that's what remains to
be seen in this episode.
Evidence that this expedition
took place is abundant.
Excuse me, at the Henry A.
Wallace library in Iowa,
we find a cachet
of letters written
by Henry Wallace
to Nicholas Roerich
during the course
of the expedition.
I secured copies
of those letters
and began to investigate
and, in fact, to decode them.
Historians such as Pulitzer
Prize winner Arthur Schlesinger
have looked at
these letters, which
are known as the Guru Letters,
and have pretty well dismissed
them.
They dismiss them
because they're
gibberish to these scholars.
And the reason why is because
they don't have eyes to see.
They don't have the
language to decode
what Wallace and
Roerich are speaking of.
So let's take a look at
one of these Guru Letters.
It's dated March 12, 1933.
The opening salutation
of the letter
says, Dear Guru-- this is
the salutation that Wallace
used when writing to his
guru, Nicholas Roerich.
By the way, he signs the
letter with the letter G.
This is said to be short for
Galahad, the nickname given
to Henry Wallace by Nicholas
Roerich's wife, Helena.
Galahad, of course, is the
last knight of the Round Table
to possess the Grail
and to see Christ.
So right off the bat, we
know that Henry A. Wallace
is a disciple of a Russian
mystic and guru and painter.
And he fancies himself
as a Grail knight
on the quest for the Grail.
So looking at the first
paragraph of the letter,
he says, "Dear Guru,
I have been thinking
of you holding the casket, the
sacred most precious casket.
And I have thought
of the new country--"
which is assumed to be
America, the new Atlantis
in their vernacular-- "going
forth to meet the seven
stars under the sign
of the three stars.
And I have thought of the
admonition, "await the stone"."
we know that the stone
they are awaiting
is the Chintamani Stone, the
wish-fulfilling jewel that
promises extraordinary power to
the person that possesses it.
In Hinduism and
Buddhism, the Arcanum
is called the Chintamani Stone,
or the wish-fulfilling jewel.
And it's one of the subjects
of Roerich's paintings
as we're seeing here and
will explore in more detail
momentarily.
The Chintamani is one
of four relics that
came to Earth in the
chest from the heavens
and is said to be held
by the bodhisattvas,
or the enlightened beings.
And we have to imagine that
Nicholas Roerich imagines
himself as close to, if
not on the same level,
as these enlightened beings.
And so now we know what Wallace
and Roerich are speaking
of when he says, "We await the
stone and we welcome you again
to this glorious land
of destiny"-- America--
"Clouded though it may be
with strange fumbling fears.
Who shall hold up
the compelling vision
to those who wander in darkness?
In answer to this question,
we again welcome you.
To drive out depression.
To drive out fear.
We think of the people
of northern Shambhala
and the hastening feet of
the successor of Buddha
and the lightning flashes in
the breaking of the new day."
What is Wallace
talking about here?
If you're a historian,
you're looking
at this thinking, who
is-- what-- Buddha?
I mean, in March 1933 when
this letter is written,
most Americans are
going to churches
with white-picket
fences out front.
Little did they know
that the president, FDR,
and his Secretary of
Agriculture, Henry A. Wallace,
were talking with a Russian
mystic about the people
of Shambhala, the
Land of the Immortals,
and the successor of Buddha
and the breaking of a new day?
This is all alchemical language
that they're using here
for the New Deal, for the new
Golden Age which had been long
prophesied and anticipated.
Wallace closes
his letter saying,
"And so I await your
convenience prepared
to do what I am here to do."
He's a man on a mission.
"May peace, joy, and fire
attend you as always,
G. In the great haste of
this strange maelstrom
which is Washington."
This letter sets up
our entire quest here.
We know Roerich is going
to Shambhala seeking
the Chintamani
Stone, and he wants
to bring it back
to America for FDR.
Extraordinary, isn't it?
Shambhala is a mythical kingdom
that represents a Golden Age.
Geographically, it's thought
to be located in Central Asia.
Psychically, however,
it's within us.
And Roerich and Wallace and
FDR most certainly knew this.
This is the subject of many of
Roerich's amazing paintings,
a gifted and talented
artist who is truly
tapped in to the
universal secrets
as well as the
rhythms of the cosmos.
In painting after
painting, we are
enchanted by his use of
color, his use of landscape
in order to open vistas
in our consciousness.
One of my favorites is his
the Most Sacred Treasure
of the Mountains, which features
Christ holding the Grail
with fire emanating
from the Grail cup.
It's absolutely stunning.
And even more stunning
to behold it in person.
Saint Panteleimon the
Healer, from 1931,
is also mystical and magical.
Saint Issa was the
name of Jesus in Asia.
And so Roerich paints
him as Issa and the Skull
of the Giant, with Jesus having
the magical blue orb or nimbus
around his head.
Then we have Christ
in the Desert
from 1933, the very
period when Wallace
is writing to Roerich
concerning the search
for the second coming and
the secrets of the Grail
and Shambhala.
Just look at the color,
feel the vibrancy
and the spiritual intention
behind this painting,
and the thought that
what Roerich is doing
is seeking the Grail
cup, the Chintamani,
on behalf of the
people of America
to make an enormous
difference in our world.
Some believe
Shambhala only exists
in a parallel universe
or a higher dimension.
And in my view,
from the research
I've done on
Nicholas Roerich, he
was very comfortable in speaking
of otherworldly realms as well
as celestial beings.
He himself carries this
immense light and intensity
in his gaze.
And just his persona, unmatched
perhaps in the modern era
until the likes of, say,
Salvador Dali, for example.
Nicholas Roerich is
seeking this though.
We must repeat on behalf
of FDR and the New Deal,
a piece of history
little known by many.
And we have to remember
that, actually, Roerich, FDR
and Wallace, these three
wise men, are in a race.
They're racing the Nazis.
They're racing Adolf Hitler
and Heinrich Himmler,
who have also
dispatched mythologists
and spiritual people
to Southern France
as well as to Tibet in search
of the secrets of the Grail
on behalf of the Nazis.
It's both seeking
these secrets, maybe
not for the power of love, but
rather for the love of power.
Now, the Buddhist
Kalachakra teaching
is what prepares
one to link with
and entire Shambhala, the
Realm of the Immortals.
This is a transmission that
is given by the Dalai Lama.
And according to Kalachakra
Tantra, the kind of Shambhala
requested teaching
from the Buddha that
would allow him to practice
the Dharma without renouncing
his worldly enjoyments and
responsibilities, which
is the usual practice.
The Kalachakra is classified
as a secret teaching,
and it's thought of
by some to be the most
advanced of all
tantric teachings.
Undoubtedly, Roerich
would have been
an initiate of the Kalachakra.
It's a Sanskrit
term, by the way,
that's used in Tantric Buddhism
that literally means time wheel
or time cycles.
And as we look at the imagery
that symbolizes the Kalachakra,
we're immediately thinking
of entrance ways or portals
into other time cycles
or other dimensions.
In fact, in Tibetan Buddhism,
the Kalachakra Mandala
is a cosmographic representation
of the inner, the outer,
and alternative
dimensions of reality.
And once again, we're
encouraged to engage
the images of the
Kalachakra initiation
and allow the frequency and
the vibration of this artwork
to attune us, to allow us to
open up our hearts and minds
to these alternate realities.
This one here is a
particular favorite
because we're, again,
encouraged to go inward,
to seek Shambhala
in the inner plane,
in the alternate inner reality.
Roerich wrote specifically
of the wizard teachers
of Shambhala.
Teaching, he said, is
the highest relation
that can be achieved
in our earthly images,
indicating that Roerich is
understanding that art can be
used as a powerful
teaching tool.
He writes in his essay
Radiant Shambhala
that "We are led by
the Teachers and we
are striving for perfection in
our reverence for the Teacher."
Of course, perfection
is a primary concept
in the idea of alchemy
where we're all
learning or attempting
to perfect ourselves,
to become more whole, more
holy, more complete beings.
So how did Nicholas Roerich
learn about the Chintamani
Stone?
Well, that's well documented,
as a matter of fact.
It happened when he was building
the first Buddhist temple
in Saint Petersburg, Russia,
which was completed in 1913.
He found favor with
Agran Dordgiev,
the Lama supervising
this project.
Trusting Roerich,
he confided in him
the whereabouts of
the elusive Chintamani
which was last seen in
the late 18th century
by an Arab scholar.
Agran told him that the
stone, the Chintamani,
could be found in the
"King's Tower" in the center
of Shambhala, the
portal of the gods,
hidden deep in the
Himalayan mountains which
is seen here in one of
Roerich's paintings,
where we see the
fiery tower and we
see the figure with
the horse here,
presumed to be Roerich who
has arrived at the King's
Tower in Shambhala and
is now ready to receive
the Chintamani.
A story is told that
when Roerich reached
the flaming tower in Shambhala,
that only his white pony was
allowed to enter the
portal of Shambhala
because Roerich believed
he wasn't pure enough
to enter this realm.
The white horse is then
a repetitive subject
in many of Roerich's
paintings, including this one
here, the White Stone,
also painted in 1933.
And we see riding upon
the horse in the flames
is the Triple Dot symbol that
represents the Chintamani
Stone, lending connective
tissue or corroborating evidence
here that indeed it
was Roerich's pony
that was actually
sent in to Shambhala
to retrieve the Chintamani.
So here's the white
horse or white pony
carrying the Chintamani.
This painting, called
the Treasure of the World
shows the Chintamani
placed on the white horse.
Now, this time, with
the flame coming out
of the crown of
the sacred casket.
This is the very
same sacred casket
that Wallace wrote to
Roerich about saying,
"We await the casket, the
sacred most precious casket.
And we await the Stone."
The Stone, of course, is
kept in the sacred casket.
And what we see is that a sacred
blue halo above the casket
warrants its powerful arrival,
watched by sentinels etched
in the rocks that guard the
procession as the horse leaves
the cave and descends
the mountain.
Interesting that this
electric blue light has often
been mentioned by those
who have experienced
near-death experiences, and the
opening of a portal or gateway
into the afterlife.
Those practicing meditation
also experience it.
And this suggests that it's
a highly significant color
in bridging earth and
parallel realms in the cosmos.
And Roerich himself
must have experienced
this electric blue light.
So could the tempura
blue that Roerich
has used in this and so
many of his paintings
represent a powerful gateway
or portal to Roerich?
Can the painting
itself assist us
in transporting us
into this portal
as so many artists
proclaim images
can show us the way
into other realms?
After six years of hard
and dangerous searching
for the Chintamani,
in 1928 Roerich
was given the stone-- which is
equated with the Philosopher's
Stone by the way-- by the
Abbot of the Trasilumpo
Lamasery in Tibet.
Roerich had at last
reached Shambhala.
And in his paintings, he shows
these Buddhist ceremonies
that take place in
these sacred locations,
maybe even a
recollection of what
he might have seen in Shambhala.
On returning to the monastery
once again just before World
War I began, Roerich
was given another stone
by the Abbot responsible for
giving him the first stone.
So Roerich has a direct
and very compelling
connection to the
Chintamani Stone.
And it must have
engendered great confidence
on the part of FDR that if he
dispatched Nicholas Roerich
to Mongolia in search of
this stone for America,
that he would be
successful in that mission.
In his published
writings, Roerich
notes that the stone
is, in fact, so powerful
that it has to be stored
between two lithium pillars,
very interesting.
There's many legends
about the Chintamani.
For example, one
stone was said to have
been sent from
Tibet to Jerusalem
to King Solomon who actually
fashioned it into a ring.
Hmm, now that's extraordinary
because Solomon is
said to have had
all kinds of magical
capabilities,
including controlling
the djinns,
or spirits that assisted
in the construction
of his magnificent temple.
As I mentioned,
the Chintamani is
symbolized by three triangulated
dots in a pyramid formation,
or triple dots.
And it's very interesting to
follow the triple dot symbolism
throughout time.
For example, Ahura
Mazda, the god
of light of Zoroastrianism,
the religion of ancient Iran,
has the Chintamani
on his cloak that
is also covered with stars.
This indicates
that this is a star
cloak or a light-body garment,
and perhaps the Chintamani
is a key aspect of this
light-body teaching.
As we follow the
Chintamani, we see it
in the detail here on
Ahura Mazda's cloak.
The Chintamani, again,
accompanying the stars.
We see it here on
the cloak of Hermes,
the Greek god of Arcanum, who
also wields his Caduceus wand.
Hermes is known to have been an
inter-dimensional traveler as
well.
So by having the
Chintamani on his cloak,
it indicates another
aspect of this teaching,
that it's fundamental to
traveling inter-dimensionally.
Mary also has the Chintamani
on her typically star-covered
cloak.
She has it again, here, in
this magnificent painting.
Mary wears the star cloak
with the Chintamani symbol
as she holds Jesus.
And she's also in a
mandorla, or open gateway,
filled with stars, again
connecting the Chintamani
with traveling into portals
leading to other dimensions.
Even Jesus has the Chintamani on
his cloak in this Resurrection
image.
Perhaps the most
iconic image of Jesus
is this image here from
St. Catharine's monastery
in the Sinai.
Jesus gives this astounding
gaze or glance as us.
But look at the book in his hand
What do we see on the book?
We see the Chintamani.
Is, in fact, the Chintamani
the Grail Stone itself?
We have to seriously
question that.
And linking, once again, not
only Jesus but Solomon, Mary,
Ahura Mazda, Hermes, all
possessed the Chintamani.
Centuries later,
the prophet Mohammed
who was also named the comforter
received other fragments
of the Chintamani.
In fact, Nicholas Roerich
painted Mohammad on Mount Hira.
As he stands here on Hira, he's
standing before a radiant being
presumed to be Allah,
but it could also
be one of these other
dimensional beings
who maybe even has now delivered
the Chintamani to Mohammed.
Solomon is a key
to Arcanum, and I
want to focus on
Solomon's connection
to Nicholas Roerich
for just a moment.
Nicholas and Helena's eldest
son, Svetoslav, also a painter,
completed this painting
in Paris in 1923.
And it shows his
father as King Solomon
before Nicholas departed
on his journey to India.
Now, this goes to the
mindset of Nicholas Roerich,
that he's clearly
connecting himself
with previous possessors
of the Chintamani.
Did he actually think he
was another incarnation
of King Solomon?
Or did Roerich perhaps
believe that he
was continuing the mission
begun by Solomon around 950 BC?
We're speculating here.
But it's very
fascinating to link
Nicholas Roerich with Solomon.
Svetoslav was inspired by
his father's essay which
is called Strings of Earth,
which was about Roerich's
desire to build a
unified temple on earth.
This would correspond with
the third temple of Solomon
in Christian prophecy, which is
thought to manifest at the end
times.
So here we have Nicholas Roerich
directly connecting himself
with Solomon and especially
the ultimate goal or mission
of creating a unified
temple on earth.
And with it, a New Deal for
humanity, a new Golden Age.
Some believe, of course,
that the Chintamani
is the Grail Stone
that was placed
in the Ark of the Covenant
along with the other tools
or implements that completed
this kit, which included
the Rod of Enlightenment, which
belonged to Aaron and Moses,
the Flask of Manna, that
star food that we believe
fed the light body and the
cruse of Anointing Oil.
While the Ark of the Covenant
was made or manufactured
during the Israelites'
wandering in the wilderness,
it ultimately found
its permanent home
in Solomon's temple atop
mystic Mount Moriah,
atop the Foundation
Stone in Jerusalem.
Nicholas Roerich was
assuredly well versed
in these legends and lore
about the Chintamani.
And here we see Svetoslav
Roerich's painting
of his father holding the
sacred, most precious casket
containing the
wish-fulfilling jewel.
During his travels
throughout Mongolia,
Roerich is said to have followed
the symbol of the Chintamani,
which he saw painted on rocks.
Here we see a photo of
the Chintamani symbol,
the triple dot symbol,
representing the three
treasures of Buddhism
on Mongolian rocks.
This photo here
and these rocks are
thought to be the inspiration
for Roerich's painting
of the very same rocks.
The symbol of the three
dots within a circle
appears in about 10 of
Roerich's known works.
This painting is the most
official representation
of the most widely known
painting of Roerich's Banner
of Peace, which was his desire
to protect cultural locations
and art works during war time.
And he intended
this Chintamani flag
to fly above all sacred
spaces so that they
would be preserved
during war time.
This, of course, is the
logo of the Chintamani.
Some believe that the three
balls and a ring of eternity
are said to represent the past,
the present, and the future.
In Madonna Oriflamma
from 1932, Roerich
paints the Madonna holding
the Banner of Peace,
the flag with the Chintamani.
She also wears it on her crown.
Roerich was a dedicated
activist for the cause
of preserving art
and architecture.
He knew the value of culture.
He knew that if people
like Adolph Hitler
got a hold of a culture's art
and were able to destroy it,
that they could effectively
cause that culture
to cease to exist.
It would just
disappear because there
would be no artifacts left to
attest to that civilization.
And he earned several
nominations, actually,
for the Nobel Peace
Prize, believing
that peace through
international collaboration--
especially among artists-- was
imperative for the survival
of mankind.
Very powerful visionary.
In fact, the Banner of Peace,
which was created in 1935,
was a result of this effort.
And here we see FDR
and Henry A. Wallace
signing the Banner of Peace,
which is Roerich's greatest
achievement in
many people's view.
The Roerich Pact, which
was signed by FDR and Henry
Wallace in the
White House in 1935.
So what did Roerich
find in Shambhala?
Signs of the Second Coming?
Secrets of the Holy Grail?
The Chintamani?
Did he really return
the Chintamani
to Henry Wallace and FDR
just before World War II?
Circumstantial
evidence says he found
something of immense
significance.
That evidence is on the
back of the $1 bill.
In 1934, FDR ordered
the great seal
of the United States
stamped on the dollar.
This was done at the request of
Henry A. Wallace and Nicholas
Roerich.
To the founding fathers, the
great seal of the United States
symbolized the
Eye of Providence,
or divine intervention
in our world.
To Masons, it symbolizes the
fulfillment of the Great Light
or the Great Work of Masonry.
To others, it signifies the
return of the light of Christ.
And while this symbol was
commissioned on July 4, 1776
and designed under the watchful
eye of Benjamin Franklin,
Thomas Jefferson,
and John Adams,
and ultimately
created in 1782, it
was rarely used in
public until FDR
made it one of the most
ubiquitous symbols in all
of human history.
This tells me that
they found something
of immense significance
in Mongolia.
And in my view, by placing this
on the back of the dollar bill,
it was sort of like
running a flag up a pole.
It told those in the know-- read
Adolf Hitler and the Nazis--
that America was
open for business
as far as this
symbolism is concerned.
America was ready to
open the new Golden Age
and to fulfill the
prophecy of the ages.
We have to thank these three
wise men for providing us
a window into the occult
history of not only America,
but the occult history,
especially, of World War II.
There was a race between
two competing factions
for these very same secrets.
On the one hand, FDR, Nicholas
Roerich and Henry Wallace.
On the other hand, Adolf
Hitler, Heinrich Himmler,
and the Nazis.
Most people are
completely unaware
of the occult significance
of World War II and the fact
that these players
were so deeply
steeped and aware of
ancient esoteric mysteries
and the value of searching
for not only portals
to other worlds,
but communicating
with celestial beings.
In the future, we have
to look to our presidents
and wonder do they really have
the same level of understanding
that these men had?
Were they coming
from the right place?
Were their hearts
in the right place?
It's only by attuning to the
highest aspects and the highest
abilities within us that many
believe, including myself,
that we will be able to create
the new order of the ages
that so many desperately seek.
And in order for
us to do this, it's
going to require
many, many individuals
attaining this higher
inner consciousness,
tapping the power of the heart,
tapping the power of the mind,
and setting their sights on
creating a new order that's
based not on the love of power,
but rather, the power of love.
And that is Arcanum.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And now, in this segment
of Beyond the Veil,
Clare's going to
introduce us to one
of the most powerful influences
on the life of Nicholas
Roerich: his wife, Helena.
>>CLARE: As the saying
goes, behind every great man
is a very patient woman who
holds the conductor's stick
and orchestrates the
direction of the marital ship.
I would like to
introduce you to one
of the most extraordinary
captains of her ship, Helena
Roerich.
It was the influence of Helena
Roerich, whom Nicholas married
in 1901, that really shaped
his career as an artist
with a library of her
extraordinary literary works
that gave him spiritual
direction both in his life
and in his art.
Helena's creative works,
scientific essays,
and artistic writings were
formulated in their mystery
school called Living
Ethics, or Agni Yoga,
combining East with West
and Heaven and Earth wisdom.
First in London in 1920 and then
in India, Helena and Nicholas
were on a powerful quest
for the truth which
was practiced and
left by the ancients
towards spiritual
advancement and perfection
of the human soul.
Roerich spent much time in India
with Mahatma's nameless Gurus,
Hermits, Rishis, and
Lamas, whom he often
depicted within his art.
Nicholas and Helena were known
as Mahatmas, or great souls,
and were highly revered
amongst their peers
and often depicted
in his paintings.
Working with a unique group
of philosophers and masters
and dissecting the
Indian spiritual culture
and studying Shambhala,
the Jewel of India,
Roerich firmly believed
energy exchanged
within man interacted
with the planet, the sun,
and the mysterious
constellations of Orion,
home of the Horsehead
Nebula and Sirius,
the brightest star
in the night sky.
First discovered in
1888, one wonders
if it influenced
Roerich's thinking
when he painted the white horse
carrying the stone of Orion,
as the Chintamani was
called by Helena Roerich.
This breadth of energy,
Roerich believed,
reached them from
other worlds made up
of matter of different states
of different dimensions,
and that they reacted
consciously or unconsciously
to this invisible energy that
penetrated their earthly lives.
Over thousands of
years, people felt
the touch of these
invisible worlds
but did not always understand
them for their own evolution.
Roerich felt that
denial of these worlds
closed the path of
ascent for them.
But there was much more.
In the accounts written
by Helena herself
in her many published
letters, she
recounts a deep
underlying secret
that the world was unaware of.
Only certain individuals
were aware of those very dark
underlying secrets.
As Helena writes in
her many letters,
she mentions the importance
of the Rothenburg Casket,
associated with Saint
Uta and the Uta Codex
in Rothenburg, Germany
and dating back to
mid-13th century.
Pictured here is Saint Uta
holding the Rothenburg Casket
in this statue.
Roerich often painted Helena
as Uta holding the casket.
Sent to the Roerichs
in Paris in 1923
by an unidentified member
of a secret society
and wrapped in a
pine box addressed
to Helena via Banquers
Trust, its contents
were wrapped in a
cloth and embroidered
with the IHS Christogram
of Jesus in a radiant sun.
Within the sacred casket
lies the Chintamani,
the sacred stone known as
the Treasure of the World,
the Lapis Exillis, the Holy
Grail, the Stone of Wisdom,
and the Stone of Joy.
The Roerichs were painted
holding this casket.
The 13th Dalai Lama decreed
that all such stones must never
again be allowed to
leave Tibet but remain
hidden in secret
places for safekeeping.
Interestingly, it would appear,
by Roerich's description
of the stone that he received,
that it has been carved
or modified and one
of several stones.
Roerich associated the
Stone with atomic energy
and believed that the power
of the stone, when held,
could dramatically
empower the recipient
to create peace or
destroy the world
and attain incredible
powers, which
is why it was hidden
in the first place.
Whilst examining
the stone, Roerich
described it as a
form of moldavite,
a magnetic mineral said to
be a spiritual accelerator
or electrical accumulator,
with a faint inscription
in Sanskrit upon which
is written the words "I
bring the chalice.
Within it, I bring a treasure."
The Stone is known as
the Treasure of the World
for this reason, the
Mongolian version meaning
Naval of the World.
Helena Roerich named
it the Terafim,
which in Hebrew
means the comforter.
Helena clearly
writes in her letters
of the concern over the
fact that the Jesuits, who
once owned the
sacred stone, were
trying to retrieve
it from the Roerichs.
So much so, that in 1924,
they made an attempt
to murder Helena in their
quest to recover the stone,
but she evaded their attacks.
In 1929, Louis Horch built
the famous Master Building
in New York for Roerich
to create an establishment
for those wishing to
enhance their knowledge
in esoteric knowledge and
placed his son, Frank Horch,
as manager of the building,
which offered the first Roerich
Museum, incorporating
all his paintings
as well as institutions
and apartments
for rent for artists and
scholars of his work.
Master mythologists Manly
P. Hall and Joseph Campbell
resided within the building.
Henry Wallace visited
Roerich there.
It is now known as the
Ghostbusters building,
as it was featured in the
movie The Ghostbusters.
The Roerichs, in
1929, supposedly
buried the casket and stone in
the cornerstone of the Master
Building in New York.
Interestingly,
M.R., the initials
of Master Roerich, as
he was known in India,
encased in the Ring of
Eternity with the three balls
depicting the symbol
for the Chintamani.
Interesting correlation
with these initials
takes us back to Egypt.
M.R. also represents a
pyramid, a place of ascension,
and also symbolizes Mount Meru.
An attempt to steal the
buried casket was made,
and the manager of
the building was sadly
murdered in the process.
Horch, shortly after
this mysterious event,
went to great
lengths to dismantle
the good name of
Roerich, culminating
in the eventual
removal of Roerich
from the building and the theft
by Horch of all Roerich's 1006
paintings, books, and
valuable artifacts.
A court case ensued and
favored Horch, resulting
in all Roerich's
belongings being
gifted to the American
Nation by the judge.
Roerich then returned to India
to spend the rest of his life.
He continued to paint
until his death in 1947.
Roerich believed the
Himalaya Mountains in India
contain the Secrets of the
Agni, the divine fire, the power
of thought being the most
powerful force in the universe
and the sacred symbol of ascent,
which would be brought out
of the mountains to illumine
human consciousness in man.
Roerich places a
significant message
in the symbology of his
paintings via the mountains,
the water, the white
horse, and the Chintamani.
He suggests in his canopy
of ethereal mastery
that the path of
the spiritual seeker
is a hazardous journey, but
one that results in rewards
that far outweigh the struggle.
We see, here, in this
symbolic painting
called Burning of
Darkness, Roerich's family
emerging from the cave,
each figure Mahatmas
and dressed in white.
The master leads the way out
of the darkness of the cave,
holding the Rothenberg
Casket encasing
the Chintamani, the sacred
fire, in the casket.
In the painting, Orion
and its constellation
are clearly visible to the
naked eye, a sharp reminder
from Roerich that the message he
paints is cosmic and very much
joining heaven and earth in
man's evolution on earth.
The sacred journey was
obviously made at night,
symbolizing the
secrecy, sacredness,
and of course privacy
of the mission, observed
by the mountain sentinels
keeping a protective watch.
The picture is drenched
in the sacred blue light
of the sacred
flame of the Stone.
What else did Roerich
learn from the Himalayas?
Another of Roerich's
masterpieces
called Treasure of the Mountain,
and one of my favorites,
holds the key to his message
for the world via his paintings.
Here we clearly see
the Pearl of Spirit
captured in the
heart of the mountain
and surrounded by powerful
and protective stalagmites
and stalactites of
crystals encasing
the illuminated gathering
in the distance.
The real treasure lies
in the background,
depicting depth, an
out-of-reach phenomena perhaps.
We see a vaulted chamber
with figures, Mahatmas,
robed in white garments.
Included in these figures is the
artist, Helena, and her family.
Notice the first three figures
are adorned with halos,
suggesting holy connection.
The master leads the way with
a lit goblet in his hands,
surrounded by powerful Mahatmas.
The goblet is the Chintamani.
Is it the same
goblet, perhaps, that
is held by Jesus,
symbolized in so
many other religious paintings?
The secrecy surrounding
the ethereal story
here is, perhaps,
what the ancients
have gone to great
lengths to keep hidden
over the centuries, information
that could have detrimental
consequences if in
the wrong hands.
He mastered the art of
using tempura paint,
an egg-based medium
which dried quite quickly
and was long lasting,
enabling the artist
to attain an ethereal,
translucent light
to his beautiful artwork.
The Egyptians would
use tempura for
their sarcophagi decorations.
Today we still see
the clarity of light
that is so famously depicted
within the very fabric
of Roerich's delicious paintings
years after completion.
Yuri Gagarin, the
first human in space,
described the incredible
gamut of rainbow colors seen
from space through the
atmosphere of Earth.
Reminiscent of the paintings,
of course, of Nicholas Roerich.
This illumined artist,
who was captivated
by the light in India
and embraced the strength
and visions he attained within
the mountains in his search
for Shambhala, most of
his greatest spiritual
works he painted in
the '30s and the '40s.
Clearly visible
in this painting,
is the form of a face taking
center stage on this canvas.
In many of his paintings, one
can clearly see ancient faces
in the mountains, often
Mayan, Mongolian, even
those reminisce
of Easter Island.
These powerful sentinels,
carved in sandstone,
always surrounding a central
theme of a cosmic nature,
and seen guarding the secret
treasure of the mountains--
like Seraphim guarding the
gates of heaven, perhaps.
Roerich spent a period of
time in Arizona and the Grand
Canyon, where he would have
acknowledged, in some depth,
the majesty of the
mountains in all
their glory and the
connection to man,
the earth, and the cosmos.
As the world wakes
up to Arcanum,
this extraordinary artist, like
so many other great masters,
is being recognized for the
powerful secrets he disguised
and transmitted.
Roerich has featured the
famous third-highest mountain
range in the world,
Kanchenjunga in India,
in a large number
of his paintings,
describing it as the five
treasures of the great snow.
Once thought to mean
that gold and silver,
gems, grain, and even the
holy books were found there.
The Roerichs believed that,
actually, this was not so.
Sacred wisdom, they believed,
was the real treasure
of the mountain, the terma.
The terma, the Tibetan
word for hidden treasure,
plays a key role here.
Tradition holds that terma
may be a physical object
such as a text, ritual implement
that is buried in the ground,
rock, tree, or, in
fact, in the mind.
What we do know is
that man has always
been captivated by the force of
energy that mountains project
and often use them as the base
for the spiritual temples.
Here the face Roerich has
being cleverly disguised
on the canvas and can be
rotated east and west.
Both directions
depict a hidden face.
What was he really
trying to tell us?
What secrets did the mountains
in the Himalayas really hide?
Roerich cleverly
unites the mountains
with man and the cosmos time and
time again in his masterpieces,
often depicting the hours
of darkness in the process,
and often with a face or a
figure to compete the message.
It is true to say
that man has always
had a lifelong fascination
with the majesty mountains.
But why?
Nicholas Roerich was one of
those rare artists of Arcanum
who did know exactly
what he was painting.
And something the rest
of the world did not.
When one studies
his many paintings,
it is impossible
to separate his art
from his spiritual philosophy.
In "The Leaves of Mariah's
Garden," Helena wrote,
"Seek not for
waters in the sand.
Ice is not found
amid sultriness.
The steepest paths
lead to the mountain."
In one of their
treasured books called
Fiery World is written
the beautiful words,
"Only the hearts
whispers how it is
possible to ascend to the
heights upon a polished stone."
>>WILLIAM: I'm William Henry.
Thank you for watching Arcanum.
>>CLARE: And I'm Clare Henry.
See you next time.